Movements of tectonic plates create volcanoes along the plate boundaries, which erupt and form mountains. A volcanic arc system is a series of volcanoes that form near a subduction zone where the crust of a sinking oceanic plate melts.[7]

Most volcanoes occur in a band encircling the Pacific Ocean (the Pacific Ring of Fire), and in another that extends from the Mediterranean across Asia to join the Pacific band in the Indonesian Archipelago. The most important types of volcanic mountain are composite cones or stratovolcanoes (Vesuvius, Kilimanjaro and Mount Fuji are examples) and shield volcanoes (such as Mauna Loa on Hawaii, a hotspot volcano).[8][9]

A shield volcano has a gently sloping cone due to the low viscosity of the emitted material, primarily basalt. Mauna Loa is the classic example, with a slope of 4°-6°. (The relation between slope and viscosity falls under the topic of angle of repose.[10]) The composite volcano or stratovolcano has a more steeply rising cone (33°-40°),[11] due to the higher viscosity of the emitted material, and eruptions are more violent and less frequent than for shield volcanoes. Besides the examples already mentioned are Mount Shasta, Mount Hood and Mount Rainier.
When plates collide or undergo subduction (that is – ride one over another), the plates tend to buckle and fold, forming mountains. Most of the major continental mountain ranges are associated with thrusting and folding or orogenesis. Examples are the Jura and the Zagros mountains
When a fault block is raised or tilted, block mountains can result.[16] Higher blocks are called horsts and troughs are called grabens. A spreading apart of the surface causes tensional forces. When the tensional forces are strong enough to cause a plate to split apart, it does so such that a center block drops down relative to its flanking blocks.

An example is the Sierra Nevada Range, where delamination created a block 650 km long and 80 km wide that consists of many individual portions tipped gently west, with east facing slips rising abruptly to produce the highest mountain front in the continental United States.

Volcanic mountains are formed when a tectonic plate is pushed beneath another (or above a mid-ocean ridge or hotspot) where magma is forced to the surface. When the magma reaches the surface, it often builds a volcanic mountain, such as s shield volcano or a stratovolcano. Examples of this sort of mountains include Mount Fuji in Japan, Mauna Kea in Hawaii, Nyamuragira in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Skjaldbreiður in Iceland  and Mount Etna in Sicily.

At other times, the rising magma solidifies below the surface and forms dome mountains, where material is pushed up from the force of the build-up beneath it. Examples of this formation include Navajo Mountain in San Juan County, Utah; the Chaitén lava dome of Chile, Torfajökull in Iceland, and Mount St. Helens in Washington State.

When beholding the sheer size and majesty of mountains, ancient humans could not help but feel that they were standing in the presence of something… godlike. And within the belief systems of many ancient cultures, it was generally felt that mountains were something spiritual – either serving as the home of the Gods, a result of their activity, or a place to get closer to God.

Thanks to modern geology, we now know the true story of how mountains are formed. Simply put, they are the result of tectonic forces or volcanism. But knowing this has not diminished their impressive and awe-inspiring nature. When a geological formation is created through forces that can only be described as titanic, this is to be expected. But just how are mountains formed?

In truth, there are three ways in which mountains are formed, which correspond to the types of mountains in question. These are known as volcanic, fold and block mountains. All of these are the result of plate tectonics, where compressional forces, isostatic uplift and intrusion of igneous matter forces surface rock upward, creating a landform higher than the surrounding features.

Block mountains are caused by faults in the crust, a seam where rocks can move past each other. Also known as rifting, this process occurs when rocks on one side of a fault rise relative to the other. The uplifted blocks become block mountains (also known as horsts) while  the intervening dropped blocks are known as graben (i.e. depressed regions).

Examples of this type of terrain can be found in the Upper Rhine valley, the Vosges mountains in France, the Black Forest in Germany, and the Vindhya and Satpura horsts in India. There is also the East African Rift, an active continental rift zone with several active volcanoes that extends from Eritrea to Mozambique.

As noted, the final way in which mountains are formed is through erosion. This occurs during and after an uplift, where a newly formed mountainous region is subjected to the effects of wind, water, ice, and gravity. These forces actively shape the surface of mountain ranges, wearing down the exposed surfaces, depositing sediment in alluvial flows, and leading to the formation of characteristic landforms.

Mountains exist all over the planet, so there are many examples to examine. One of the most famous mountains is Mount Everest. Mount Everest is in the Himalayan Mountains in the country of Nepal. It is the highest mountain in elevation, reaching 29,035 feet (8,850 meters) at its peak. While Mount Everest reaches the highest elevation, technically it is not the tallest mountain on the planet. Mauna Kea, a mountain in Hawaii holds that record. While Mauna Kea only reaches an elevation of 13,796 feet (4,205 meters) it begins at the ocean floor. Its height from the ocean floor to its peak is 32,696 feet (9,966 meters). That is 3,661 feet (1,116 meters) taller than Mount Everest. Mount Everest is still considered the highest mountain, though, due to its elevation, while Mauna Kea is the tallest.

Another mountain example is Chimborazo, which is located in the country of Ecuador and is part of the Andes Mountain range. Chimborazo is 6,600 feet (2,012 meters) in elevation below Mount Everest, but it is the farthest point from the center of the Earth. This is because Earth is not a perfect sphere but bulges in the middle (around the equator). This slight bulge puts the peak of Chimborazo farther away from the center of the planet than Mount Everest.

Fog obscures the summit of Malaysia's Mount Kinabalu, a 13,455-foot (4,101-meter) peak in northwestern East Malaysia. Formerly known as St. Peter's Mount, Kinabalu is the highest mountain in the Malay Archipelago.
PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSE AZEL
SCIENCEREFERENCE
Mountains
They define landscapes, people risk their lives to climb them, and they can even make their own weather.

3 MIN READ

The mighty chunks rise all over the world, including the oceans. They usually have steep, sloping sides and sharp or rounded ridges, and a high point, called a peak or summit. Most geologists classify a mountain as a landform that rises at least 1,000 feet (300 meters) or more above its surrounding area. A mountain range is a series or chain of mountains that are close together.

How Are Mountains Formed?
The world's tallest mountain ranges form when pieces of Earth's crust—called plates—smash against each other in a process called plate tectonics, and buckle up like the hood of a car in a head-on collision. The Himalaya in Asia formed from one such massive wreck that started about 55 million years ago. Thirty of the world’s highest mountains are in the Himalaya. The summit of Mount Everest, at 29,035 feet (8,850 meters), is the highest point on Earth.

The tallest mountain measured from top to bottom is Mauna Kea, an inactive volcano on the island of Hawaii in the Pacific Ocean. Measured from the base, Mauna Kea stands 33,474 feet (10,203 meters) tall, though it only rises 13,796 feet (4,205 meters) above the sea.

Volcanic mountains form when molten rock from deep inside the Earth erupts through the crust and piles up on itself. The islands of Hawaii were formed by undersea volcanoes, and the islands seen above water today are the remaining volcano tops. Well-known volcanoes on land include Mount St. Helens in Washington State and Mount Fuji in Japan. Sometimes volcanic eruptions break down mountains instead of building them up, like the 1980 eruption that blew the top off Mount St. Helens.

When magma pushes the crust up but hardens before erupting onto the surface, it forms so-called dome mountains. Wind and rain pummel the domes, sculpting peaks and valleys. Examples include the Black Hills of South Dakota and the Adirondack Mountains of New York. Plateau mountains are similar to dome mountains, but form as colliding tectonic plates push up the land without folding or faulting. They are then shaped by weathering and erosion.

Other types of mountains form when stresses within and between the tectonic plates lead to cracking and faulting of the Earth's surface, which forces blocks of rock up and down. Examples of fault-block mountains include the Sierra Nevada in California and Nevada, the Tetons in Wyoming, and the Harz Mountains in Germany.

The folding of layers of sedimentary rocks with thicknesses of hundreds of metres to a few kilometres often leaves long parallel ridges and valleys termed fold belts, as, for example, in the Valley and Ridge province of Pennsylvania in the eastern United States. The more resistant rocks form ridges, and the valleys are underlain by weaker ones. These fold belts commonly include segments where layers of older rocks have been thrust or pushed up and over younger rocks. Such segments are known as fold and thrust belts. Typically their topography is not as regular as where folding is the most important process, but it is usually dominated by parallel ridges of resistant rock divided by valleys of weaker rock, as in the eastern flank of the Canadian Rocky Mountains or in the Jura Mountains of France and Switzerland.

Most fold and thrust belts are bounded on one side, or lie parallel to, a belt or terrain of crystalline rocks. These are metamorphic and igneous rocks that in most cases solidified at depths of several kilometres or more and that are more resistant to erosion than the sedimentary rocks deposited on top of them. These crystalline terrains typically contain the highest peaks in any mountain belt and include the highest belt in the world, the Himalayas, which was formed by the thrusting of crystalline rocks up onto the surface of the Earth. The great heights exist because of the resistance of the rocks to erosion and because the rates of continuing uplift are the highest in these areas. The topography rarely is as regularly oriented as in fold and thrust belts.

In certain areas, blocks or isolated masses of rock have been elevated relative to adjacent areas to form block-fault mountains or ranges. In some places, block-fault ranges with an overall common orientation coalesce to define a mountain belt or chain, but in others the ranges may be isolated.

Block faulting can occur when blocks are thrust, or pushed, over neighbouring valleys, as has occurred in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado, Wyoming, and Utah in the western United States or as is now occurring in the Tien Shan, an east–west range in western China and Central Asia. Within individual ranges, which are usually a few hundred kilometres long and several tens of kilometres wide, crystalline rocks commonly crop out. On a large scale, there is a clear orientation of such ranges, but within them the landforms are controlled more by the variations in erosion than by tectonic processes.

Block faulting also occurs where blocks are pulled apart, causing a subsidence of the intervening valley between diverging blocks. In this case, alternating basins and ranges form. The basins eventually fill with sediment, and the ranges—typically tens of kilometres long and from a few to 20–30 kilometres wide—often tilt, with steep relief on one side and a gentle slope on the other. The uniformity of the gently tilted slope owes its existence to long periods of erosion and deposition before tilting, sometimes with a capping of resistant lava flows on this surface prior to tilting and faulting. Both the Tetons of Wyoming and the Sierra Nevada of California were formed by blocks being tilted up toward the east; major faults allowed the blocks on their east sides to drop steeply down several thousand metres and thereby created steep eastern slopes.

In some areas, a single block or a narrow zone of blocks has subsided between neighbouring blocks or plateaus that moved apart to form a rift valley between them. Mountains with steep inward slopes and gentle outward slopes often form on the margins of rift valleys. Less commonly, large areas that are pulled apart and subside leave between them an elevated block with steep slopes on both sides. An example of this kind of structure, called a horst, is the Ruwenzori in East Africa.

Finally, in certain areas, including those that once were plateaus or broad uplifted regions, erosion has left what are known as residual mountains. Many such mountains are isolated and not part of any discernible chain, as, for instance, Mount Katahdin in Maine in the northeastern United States. Some entire chains (e.g., the Appalachians in North America or the Urals in Russia), which were formed hundreds of millions of years ago, remain in spite of a long history of erosion. Most residual chains and individual mountains are characterized by low elevations; however, both gentle and precipitous relief can exist, depending on the degree of recent erosion.


